yes oh my god it worked okay right
sorry for the delay hello again bats
fans
um yes thank you eric
it just froze on my face and sorry about
that you just had two minutes of my
frozen face but i think we are now up
and running
if you can't hear me or see me or
something else goes horribly wrong
please do let me know uh in the chat
so hello everybody uh this is the
um fourth no the fifth even isn't it
because these things are flying by this
is the fifth
uh tom roxmart's appeal uh live stream
so i've been doing these as part of the
uh tom rock's mass appeals series
which we've been running over the last
few weeks with my friends bobby and
susan
from matt's field hello bobby and susan
if they're watching um
so the theme this week in our video
lesson was trigonometry
and we actually got more questions sent
in on this topic than any other
which i think tells you something either
people really really
don't know what they're doing with it
and have lots of questions or people
really enjoy trigonometry and therefore
have lots of interesting questions
so either way i've got lots and lots of
questions that i'm going to try and get
through
in the first sort of uh let's say 40
minutes or so
of the live stream and then as i've done
before i'll open up the last 20 minutes
uh to any questions at all anything to
do with maths uh
in the live chat and i'll see if we can
get through some of those
um so to kick us off uh we have a great
question
which has come in from mj so hello mj if
you're watching thank you for the
question
and mj asked about something called
the sine well things called the sine and
cosine
laws so i'm going to kick off by talking
about the sine and cosine laws
so we're going to start with a triangle
uh let's draw myself a triangle
you'll notice this is not a right angle
triangle this can be any
triangle and then i'm going to label my
unknown angles
a b
and c so i've just got any old triangle
three angles
and then we label the opposite side to
the angle with the same letter
so this has length side length a this is
going to be side length c
and this is side length b now
the sine law tells us
sine law
tells us that a divided by sine
a is equal to b divided by
sine b is equal to c
divided by sine c so this is saying if
you take
uh the length of one side of your
triangle this thing remember can be
any triangle doesn't have to be right
angled just take
the length of the side and divide it by
sine of the angle opposite that side
then these three things will be equal
now
the more interesting question is where
does this come from
so that's what we're going to look at um
and the way to do that
is to use trigonometry right so there's
kind of a clue it's called the sign law
because talking about cause and sign and
we're talking about trigonometry
so if we
add a straight line down from this top
angle then this
on both sides in fact is now a right
angle
and so if i call this side this middle
thing
x let's call it then what we have
is a right angle triangle and i'll draw
it out let's say down here
a bit clearer so i've got side length
x this one's c this one i don't know
but i do know this angle a
so i don't know the angle at the top i
don't necessarily know
the length here because this could be
any triangle remember
but i definitely do know this is angle a
and this is side length c
so i've got an angle and a hypotenuse
and i'm interested in the opposite
side x i want to find x so i've got
hypotenuse opposite
socatoa silly old harry whatever however
you remember this
if anyone else has any good ways of
remembering the the trigonometry rules
please do share them i've seen quite a
few
in the youtube comments and they've been
very entertaining to read
um so i would go with silly old harry
quarter herring traveling over america
so silly old harry means sine of a
is equal to opposite over hypotenuse
um o opposite is x
over hypotenuse is c
so this tells me from my rule of
trigonometry
that x is equal to c
times sine of a right so now i know the
height
of the center of my triangle now i know
the height of my triangle
now we want to try and do this for the
other half
the other side of the triangle so i've
done this using angle a
so i can flip it do it for the other
half of the triangle here so i've got c
got x and i've got a this one now
so again if i apply my it's going to be
sine again
because i'm interested i've got the
hypotenuse i'm interested in the
opposite so silly old harry is going to
tell me that sine of c
is equal to the opposite x over the
hypotenuse a
and so that's going to give me that
x is equal to a sine of c
so we have two equations for x and they
both have to be true
because they're both just based on our
trigonometry rules
so if these two are equal to each other
because they're both x
then what that tells us is that
c sine a
is equal to a sine c
and so if i rearrange that that's the
same as oops
c over sine c
equals a over sine a
so that gives me uh this one is equal to
this one so that's the first part of my
sine rule
and then you could go back and do the
same so instead of drawing my line
going through angle b if i were to go
back
get a different color if i were to go
and do something like that as my line
through angle a
then i could now create a similar
formula involving b
and get the same result that this was
also equal to b divided by sine
b so the sine rule the sign law
is this thing a over sine a equals b
over sine b equals c over sine
c for this triangle and we derive it
it follows by just doing the
trigonometry rules uh
sockatoa that we talked about in our
video lesson
all right and then the other one that mj
mentioned i'm not going to do a
derivation
but also mj did ask about the cosine law
so the cosine law
is same triangle
but now it tells me that c squared is a
squared plus b squared
now it isn't a right angle triangle so
pythagoras doesn't apply
so we have an extra term here which is
minus 2
a b cos of c
so the first part is like pythagoras
theorem
but remember we don't expect pythagoras
to work
because the triangle abc is not a right
angle triangle
so the cosine law just tells you how to
work out your side length
c let's say in terms of the others
if it's not a right angle triangle and
you can
derive this formula in the same way
as i worked out the sign law you draw
your sort of perpendicular lines and you
use trigonometry
sof khatoa to work out various different
relationships
and you can rearrange to get this but
that one takes a lot longer so
i think i've probably done enough just
going through the sign on so i hope
that's okay mj that's the sign law and
the cosign law good question
right uh the next one
uh now this one's very fun big fan of
this question uh this one was from sarah
sarah you sent a lot of questions in so
thank you again sarah and hello
um so this one uh sarah's question was
um how uh well wanted to know sarah
wanted to know about the functions
um sec cosec and cot
so can anyone tell me what is the
relationship between sec
cosec and cot to our normal
trigonometric functions
sine cos and tan i'll let you think
about that
and if you want to type in the chat
please do whilst i clean the board
so sec co-second cot what on earth are
they
awesome doji and sam thank you
reciprocals they are indeed so
we've got um sec of x
is one over cos
um let's do it up here cosec
is one over whoops cosec of x let's do
it properly
1 over sine of x and then we've got
cut of x is going to be 1 over 10.
now so this is uh the relationship they
are just reciprocals
so if you know the value of cos of an
angle or sine of an
angle or tan then the value for
sec co-second cop it's just one divided
by that
so i think we did an example of um cos
of
which one was it cos of 60 cos of 60 for
example is a half
and so if we were to um
plug in a half here a sec of 60 would be
two
for example now the interesting thing
about these functions i think is trying
to draw the graphs
so let's have a go at that um
so what i'm going to do is do three sets
of axes
for each of our graphs try and fit this
all on the board
um so first of all sarah that's how we
define these functions and that's how
you work out the angles like i said just
one over
whatever cause and sign are or tan
but now the graphs i think are more
interesting so
that one and then let's draw a third
axis here
right so our starting point is going to
be first to draw
the graphs of cosine and tan
because if we draw the original graphs
which we are more familiar with
then that will be helpful in trying to
draw the reciprocal
of the graph right because it's just one
over whatever value
sine cos and tan have so if we start
with cos
um so cos of zero is one
and then it comes down and then it comes
back up right so
and it'll be the same over on this side
as well nice and symmetrical
possibly the best cause graph i've ever
drawn okay
so that's our cos function it's meant to
be symmetrical
okay it's not quite as good as i thought
it's almost symmetrical
uh then we're going to draw our sine
graph which is the same but kind of
shifted
so it kind of looks like that and then
this way
uh it's gonna go up and then come down
right they're gonna be the same height
uh and then tan tan's a bit fiddly um
but tan goes through zero and then goes
up to infinity
and then kind of does the same down
there
and then for the next part it looks the
same as well
it comes in like that and where this
is these are the same points
and if i'm going to draw this properly i
should also add in the last part as well
um so then it's got to come in
and go like that right so as you can see
uh signing calls are like the same thing
um
you take your cars and you just kind of
shift it across by 90 degrees
and you get sign it's basically what's
happening there um but tan is very very
different
tan has these uh sort of infinite points
or these undefined
points which we talked about in our
video at uh 90 degrees
and also at minus 90 as well so
if we want to now plot the inverse
functions
that's what we're interested in um
you can kind of just look at the graph
and think about
basically taking the value of the graph
and flipping it
so for example um when we are at one
when cos is one one over one is still
one
so we're going to be here for um sec
of zero and then
as cos starts to get smaller
we decrease away from one right so say
we get down to like uh
suppose that's a half then sec has
actually
increased to like two right so as cos
gets smaller
set gets bigger so what you've kind of
got here is this
thing like this and what's going to
happen when we get
when cos gets to zero we've got
one divided by zero
which is undefined or infinity it's
going to tend to infinity
as cos tends to zero which is when x
goes to 90 then sec will go to infinity
so you actually end up with a sort of
u-shape like this going all the way up
to infinity
like so and then you're going to get the
same thing down here
except it's now negative so same idea
the cos values are now negative so sec
is one over a negative number and it's
as we get to here it's got to go to
minus infinity
and then it touches and then it comes
down
so you just kind of take these bits
and do that and do that and then there'd
be another bit
here as well another bit
there as well so the thing in pink
hopefully looks pink to you guys is
going to be the sec
graph which is just one divided by the
cos graph so it's pretty pretty funky
um and then the sine function is going
to be very very similar the cosec
function
because as i said cos is the same graph
as sine just shifted a little bit
along the x-axis and so
what we can do is basically just shift
our pink
new shapes to coincide with the the
bumps in the sine function
so you get exactly the same thing here
here and then the negative ones down
here
so second cosec are very much
the similar graphs just a shift exactly
like sine and cos
are just a shift of each other now
cut x so tan was already a pretty funky
graph we already had these bits going to
infinity
so cut x again it's just one over the
value of tan
so that one's in purple this is going to
be a powerful
so um at zero
when tan is zero one over zero infinite
so as tan tends to zero cot will tend to
infinity
so here we're going to uh infinity
and then as tan gets bigger and bigger
and bigger
one over it gets smaller and smaller and
smaller so while this one goes up and
increases towards
infinity at 90 degrees
cut decreases and has to go
when we have one over infinity which you
know
we should do this properly and take a
limit but let's just go with it one over
infinity is zero
you're dividing by a bigger and bigger
number one divided by something bigger
and bigger and bigger is going to just
drop down
to be zero so that goes through zero
and then it's going to uh then start to
be negative
and do that as we have before
and then you're going to get the same
thing over here
so let me just think about this so this
bit has to be negative
and then come in and then as you go
through there
like that and then that bit's gonna grow
up
like that so you end up with very very
similar um
cotton tan but just kind of you could
think of it as like reflecting
in fact um in sort of
a central axis it's like a one's a
reflection of the other
so great question um sarah asking about
cosec second co we can just define them
as one over
cos uh sine and tan and then we can draw
these pretty cool graphs
right um where did i want to go next
i wanted to stick talking about graphs
so we're not gonna
uh we're gonna leave second co second
cot
now but we're gonna come back to coles
and sign
um and in particular this is a question
from joe who is interested
in um different graphs of sine
where instead of just plotting sine of x
you plot slightly more complicated
functions
so for example sine of 2x or sine of 3x
or even x times sine of x
so i'm going to look at a few of those
graphs next is the plan
um and i see there's been a few
questions uh posted in the chat
i again i'll come back to them when we
open it up at the end
um but if you do have any questions then
do do comment them now that's fine and
i'll just scroll back up and read them
at the end
when we do the live chats part of the
stream
okay so
joe wanted to know what are the graphs
of
functions like sine of 2x
sine of 3x or even
x sine x
okay so we'll start with the first two
and then we will pop up to the uh
the third one tricky one x sine of x
um right well we're gonna need a graph
of sine of x that's gonna be our sort of
starting point here so
i'm gonna look at sine of x um
and i'm only going to consider x
positive just
because we'll just can't it doesn't
really matter it'll be reflected
in the uh axis but we'll just
concentrate on x being positive for now
and think about what's happening so sine
looks like that right let's get some
different colors on the go
so let's use my apparently i'm really
into my pink chalk today so let's go
with my pink chalk for sine
2x now let's think about what
what this sort of means right when
you're trying to plot
sine there are some key points that
really help us out
so right for example we know that sine
is one
uh at 90 degrees or pi by two i'll i'll
stick to degrees just because someone
asked a question about radians
i'll stick to degrees all right so 90
degrees
because we use degrees in the lesson so
be consistent
uh and then we get to the point when
it's zero at 180 degrees
then this is like 270.
this is 360. right
and obviously this is zero so these are
like the key points you've got that
sine of x um is one
and 90 degrees right so let's write that
out so sine of x
is uh so sine of 90 degrees even oh well
sine of x is one at x equals 90 degrees
so if i'm now trying to plot sine of 2x
right so if i plot sine of 2x
then this will equal 1
when 2x is equal to 90 degrees
right because sine of something we want
to try and solve
sine of something equals one and we know
that
one point which satisfies that is sine
of 90
equals one so here
this will be true at 2x
equals 90 which is just x equals 45
degrees
so this is why it can be helpful to
think about some of the points like
the peaks and the zeros because we're
gonna get the same thing
happening at 180. so sine
of x is zero when x is 180
um zero at x is
180 so sine
of 2x is zero
when 2x and 2x is 180
so when x is 90.
and we could try this for a few other
points but what we're really seeing
is you're kind of just sort of squashing
everything a bit
is one way to think about it so whilst
here
for sine x you have this sort of wave
shape
this peak u-shape happening between
north and 180
when you go to 2x your wave shape
it still has to go up to 1 at 45 degrees
but it's got to get to zero at 90 from
here
so it's kind of got to do that
so you're like squashing your wave a
little bit
and then you only get the same thing
down here so by 180 you've got to be
back at zero so this comes down
and goes like that and then you get the
same thing it's going to go up and come
back to zero by 270
and then go down and come back to zero
there
so instead of having two bumps the white
one
is sine x which just has the one
positive peak one negative
when you have sine of two x you just
kind of condense it kind of like one of
those uh
french industry instruments accordion
kind of like an accordion
you push the graph together a little bit
and you just get more bumps
and the accordion is actually quite a
good picture to have in mind because
if we went a step further use orange
we went a step further and looked at
sine of 3x
exact same idea so instead of
3x has to be 90 degrees so x 30 degrees
now
so you're going to get your peak even
sooner than we had
it's not going to go through now it's
going to go through 60.
like that and then you're going to have
to let me think about this now
come down and go back up
and then come up and at 180 degrees
uh i need to be at zero don't i
so it's even more squashed when you do
sine of 3x
we've now got uh this is going to come
down
come back through there through
there right okay
so we went from two peaks to four peaks
and now we've got six
peaks right so here we had six
the sine of three x and we had four for
here
right where the peaks are the max and
the min right each one i'm calling like
a peak or a hump
and then you also had and you only had
two for that
so as you increase the value of your x
so you go through
um you could sort of write it as uh
sine of kx
and as you increase k
you're just squashing the sine curve
more and more this way
to get more and more peaks so it's just
starting with your big wide accordion
with only two um kind of
um like peaks two kind of
yeah bends and then you're squashing it
in so now it has four and then again and
it has six
you're kind of squashing it together to
create more and more waves more intense
waves
it's one way to think about it um so
that's
sine 2x sine of 3x and we could do this
for any k
we just squash the graph more and more
over towards the um
y-axis now if we want to
um think about x sine of x that's a
whole other thing
so let's have a little go at that one
let's rub this up
so um
now the idea um of this
there are two ways to think about this
the way the way i like to think about it
is
we've still got sine of x so you could
try plugging in some values of x into
this for example
so if you plug in x equals naught um
right you're here
if you plugged in um oh so if you wanted
to plug in 90 degrees which would be
in radians you'd have to kind of work in
radians here uh
you would plug in uh what pi over two so
then you get pi over two times sine of
pi over two which is one so you get pi
over two
for example um so you can work out
various points if you really want
but i don't think that's necessarily
that constructive gives you a bit of a
feeling
for what was going on now what's going
to happen
is or one way i like to think about it
is
the sign you're still going to get that
wavy behavior
right because we saw from our sine graph
it sort of it goes up and down it has
this periodicity
and it creates these waves and so you're
still going to get the oscillations
from sine of x because you're
multiplying by something positive
so again if i just consider x being
positive
i've got a positive number multiplied by
something
that waves between minus one and one
so i'm still going to get something that
wiggles but the size of the thing that
wiggles
is controlled by x
so if i were to plot y equals x
here like so and also in fact y equals
minus
x
when i have small x
right this is something small times
sine of whatever the number is so the
actual
size of my sine function is determined
by x so we know that sine of x
um i wasn't writing like that we know
that sine of x
belongs to minus 1 1. it's always
between -1 and 1.
and so as it sort of oscillates
the actual size of the whole function is
determined by
x so these lines
are actually the boundary of your sine
function so for small x
it's small and then you're going to get
your oscillations like this
where they go between the y equals x and
minus x lines
so you can plot this yourselves you can
try some points and it will look like
this
but the key thing is this idea that
the sine function tells you it's got to
wiggle about
has to do that and then it's the x at
the front
that provides these like boundary curves
that it can't go beyond
so you end up with something like this
and this will get bigger and bigger and
bigger and bigger
as you continue to increase x so it's a
really nice
question actually joe so thank you
and that leads me really nicely into the
next question it's almost as though i
plan these
if i plan the order i don't plan the
questions uh the next question
which came in from owen and owen
asked about sine x divided by
x so this is a classic
question but one that i'm more than
happy to uh
to have a go at here so owen wanted to
know what happens
to sine x divided by
x as x tends to zero so
owen's question sine x divided by x
as x
to zero right
few different ways of thinking about
this um
and because we've just been talking
about graphs i'm going to start
thinking about graphs okay so
if we call this this is my y
so what you could
do based on the discussion that we just
had so i said that when you had
x times sine of x you still get the
wiggly behavior
but it's bounded by y equals x and y
equals minus x those two straight lines
so now we've just got 1 over x
times sine of x so our boundary
is going to be given by 1 over x is a
way to interpret
the question so before it was given by x
but now
if we plot one over x
it's going to look something like this
and if we plot minus one over x
it's going to look something like that
right so these two
and we'll do them in a different color
and label them so we can
make sure everyone's following what
we're doing
so these curves are y equals 1 over x
and y is minus 1 x
right so this is just what we did last
time we had y equals x and y equals
minus x is our two boundaries
because we had x sine of x now
we've got one over x times sine of x
so our boundaries are going to be
given by this one over x function
so in between here this is the easy bit
as we get really small
right this just has to get small and
then it's going to get a bit bigger and
now it gets tricky so this will will go
to zero right
and this will get bounded and will be
very very small so you've got like
waves which are decaying so you can
think of it as your sine function but
the amplitude gets smaller and smaller
and smaller
so it's like if you uh if you created
waves on like the surface of a pond or a
lake
right they're really big near where you
make the waves and then the amplitude
decays
as you move further away so that's like
what's happening here
now the tricky bit is what happens near
zero and this is exactly why
um i'm guessing owen asked this question
right because on one hand
if this was just the boundary then there
could
be possible that this thing just
continues to get bigger
and bigger and goes all the way to
infinity maybe
that would be a perfectly reasonable
thing uh to sort of think about
right so it's not a proof and it's
actually incorrect
but it would follow this idea
of having our sine function bounded
by these two curves so the problem here
is
we have to be careful because
we are dividing by zero so in our other
function when we had
y equals x sine of x
this was fine when we took the limit as
x went to zero
because um we just got zero
times sine of zero which is zero times
zero which is zero
so that just all kind of worked right
with no problems
but here we're going to be dividing by
zero
and as we uh have seen
in fact with cotton with tan that can
cause things to go to infinity sometimes
sometimes it doesn't it's it's like a
difficult thing uh to deal with
especially because we've got zero
divided by zero
in this situation so that means you've
actually got to take the proper limit
you can't just substitute in
zero uh and say it's infinity or 1 or
whatever you actually have to take a
limit
because we've got 0 on top 0 on the
bottom
and that can actually be equal to
anything depending on how you take the
limit
so we do have to be very very careful so
in order to do this there are a few
different ways to do this
um i think my favorite way
is probably using power series
um and i do want to talk about power
series
but before i get to using power series
i also want to as my final question of
the day
touch on a question that came in from vj
which was about hyperbolic functions
so i'm going to kind of take a slight
detour take like
a screenshot picture this in your mind
we're going to work out
what's the limit of this as x goes to
infinity
but in order to do it i want to show you
how to do it using power series
so we're going to take a little detour
talk about power series and some other
functions and then come back and get the
answer
okay so i hope that's all right i just
want to try and cover everyone's
questions
uh all at once and it should make the
the limiting process make more sense i
think
so i'll leave this one on but i'll get
rid of the graph
so we know what the graph looks like
apart from near zero that's the only bit
that we're struggling with
which is why owens question uh is so
important
so the reason i wanted to uh talk about
power series and this links nicely
uh with vj's question because vj asked
about
um hyperbolic functions so
i don't know if any of you i'm sure some
of you will heard of these so we have
these things called
kosh of x and shine
or cinch some people call it cinch some
people call it shine
i'm very much on the shine uh side of
things i think it's a nicer thing to say
cinch just no don't like it as a word
so these are hyperbolic functions um and
these are very similar to cause and sign
which is why they have the same why it's
why it's cars
by its sign but then they have a h which
means it's the hyperbolic version
and they have formulas so cosh of x is e
to the x
plus e to the minus x
divided by two uh which is just the
exponential function
and shine of x is e to the x
minus e to the minus x
divided by two right so they're just the
formulas for our hyperbolic functions
right so they're just this is how we
define them
um you know you plug in the numbers plug
in the value of x you can calculate your
exponentials you can calculate caution
shine
now the interesting thing is how they
relate to cos and
sine and that was vj's question how do
the hyperbolic functions relate to
trigonometric functions
so what we can actually do
is write cos of x in terms of
exponentials so cos of x um
wait actually i tell you what rather
than me jumping in there
let's use um let's use euler's identity
because i was asked about euler's
identity by uh
somebody called tom great name um
asked me about all his uh all as well
rather than listening euler's identity
is maybe a bit confusing because euler's
identity usually means
uh e to the i pi plus one is zero the
one i have tattooed here in fact
um but we want to think about euler's
maybe let's call it euler's theorem
there are many euler's theorems but we
want to think about euler's theorem
here which tells us that e to the i
theta
is equal whoops is equal to
cos theta plus pi
sine theta okay so i'm going we're going
to assume that is true
right because we have to start somewhere
so if you've if you've seen this before
great if you haven't don't worry i'm
telling you this is true
e to the i theta is cos theta plus i
sine theta
so if you assume that's true what we can
now do
is we can rearrange to express cos
in terms of exponentials so
if this is e to the i theta then e to
the minus i
theta is by definition cos
of minus theta plus i
sine of minus theta
right so i'm just replacing theta here
by minus theta
that's all i've done but we know that
cos
is an even function so cos of x
is equal to cos of minus x so this is
actually just cos of theta
so we can rub that out and sine is an
odd function so
sine of x is equal to minus sine of
minus x
so we can therefore put a minus
there and get rid of that one
so e to the minus i theta using the fact
cos is even sine is odd gives us cos
theta minus i sine theta
now we can just add them together
because if i do the top one plus
if i do e to the i theta plus e to the
minus i theta
the sine terms cancel they completely
vanish i've got plus i
sine theta minus i sine theta so they
will just cancel when i add them
together
and i get two lots of cars so cos
of let's write it as x is actually just
e to the i
x plus e to the minus i x
over two just by adding these two
equations together
and then if you do the top one minus the
bottom one
we then get two lots of sine
so this one no this one minus this one
causes cancel and i've got two
i sine theta so therefore sine
is the top one minus the bottom one
divided by 2i
okay so start from euler's theorem
consider it for minus theta using cos
being even sine being odd
combine them add them together and
rearrange for cos
subtract them rearrange for sine and
it's important that the sine one
has got an i on the denominator it's an
important thing to remember
now those two formulas for cos and sine
over here look very similar
to the formulas i've got my hyperbolic
functions
over here very very similar
can anyone tell me how do we make one of
them
equal to the other
this is where you guys you're a good
like 40 minutes into the live stream so
i think it's about time i asked you a
difficult question
so i want to know what is the way to
write
um kosh in terms of cause or
shine in terms of sign so have a little
think
you've got all the information you need
in those two boxes
and i will just rub off this
i would recommend starting from cos
was how i did it you can do it in
different ways but i started with cos
and just replaced x with something else
multiply sine by i and x becomes minus
ix to this side
yes good joshua right you're on the
right track that might even be correct
um it's difficult obviously i'm aware
it's difficult to type maths in your
youtube live chat box
uh well done so there are different ways
to think about it but
what i'm going to do is start with cos
and then say
if i can say the cos of ix
and then just use my formula so cos of
ix
is equal to e of
i times the thing in the cos so that's
going to give me
e to the i squared x
plus e to the minus i
squared x over 2.
but i squared is of course yes exactly
as joshua said i squared
is of course minus 1. so this
is minus and that becomes a plus
so that is just kosh
so that's the relationship between the
hyperbolic cosine
cosh of x and cos you simply have
cos of ix is cosh
so they're very very closely related
functions believe it or not
and then you do a similar thing for sine
sine is actually a little bit trickier
so shine actually so what you do
and i think this is what joshua said
actually is you do
minus i times sine of
i x
so we have to multiply by the i to get
rid of the denominator
we have to do that so we're going to get
minus
i so then we've got the two the eyes on
the bottom disappeared
we've still got the half and then we
need sine of
i x so that's going to be e to the minus
x minus e to the x
and then we also had a minus sign didn't
we so minus plus
and that is exactly what shine is equal
to
we've got the plus with the e to the
plus minus e to the minus
plus on the u to the x minus one e to
the minus x
so we get that relationship so cos of i
x is cosh and minus i
sine of ix is shine
okay so that's the answer to vj's
question about hyperbolic functions
and their relation to trig functions now
what we're going to do
very very final thing we want to answer
joe's question what's the limit
sine x over x as x tends to 0.
so we don't need these anymore
but the reason i wanted to talk about
the hyperbolic functions
is because now it allowed me to
introduce
these two formulas for cos and sine so i
can get rid of this one
so we now have two formulas for cos and
sine and we're going to concentrate on
the sine one because we're trying to
work out sine of x over x
so i can work out the
infinite series or the power series for
sine
using this formula because i know
the infinite series for x for the
exponential function sorry
e to the x is the sum from n equals
naught to infinity
of x to the n over n factorial
that is the power series of an
exponential so if i combine these
exponentials down here
that means that sine of x is 1 over 2
i times e to the ix
so that's going to be if i write out
properly
i x to the n
over n factorial plus the sum
minus i x to the n
over n factorial right so it's a pretty
complicated expression
has two infinite sums in here from
naught to infinity
but the important thing is
this version of sine and then using our
exponential power series
combining them in this way you can
actually expand out
some of these brackets because we know
that when i
is taken i squared gives you minus 1
i to the power 4 gives you 1 i
to the power 3 gives you minus i so you
actually get a repeating pattern
of sometimes with eyes sometimes without
sort of
in all of these terms and when you do
this you
multiply out these terms and these terms
and kind of add them together
the magic happens because when you do
that
most of them cancel and the whole thing
turns into
x minus x cubed over 3
factorial plus x to the 5
5 factorial plus dot dot
forever so what you end up with is your
sine
power series so i highly recommend that
you actually
expand out a few of these terms just do
you know n equals one two and three
for each of them and convince yourself
that the right terms cancel and you get
just the odd powers so what you end up
with is that sine of x
is equal to um x
minus x cubed three factorial
plus x to the five over five factorial
minus x to the seven and the seven
factorial
and you just carry on so it's all the
odd powers of x
divided by that number factorial and you
swap signs the signs
alternate from plus to minus now
how does this help us with y this
remember was ultimately what we were
trying to do
we've gone through this whole power
series derivation so we can calculate
this limit
because now if i calculate
sine x over x using the power series
here
it's just 1 minus x squared
over 3 factorial plus x to the 4
over 5 factorial plus well minus
but then you just carry on with the
pattern so
now finally we can take our limit
because we have no
x terms left on the denominator so we
can just now take the limit
as x goes to zero of y
so 1 stays as 1 this term now goes to 0
because it's 0 divided by 6. so it's 0.
this term is 0 divided by 120 it's 0.
all the other terms have a power of x
positive power of x in them so they all
go to zero so your answer
is just one and so on our graph to come
full circle
the graph of um sine x to the power
x sorry sine x
over x it starts at one
and then it starts to decay and goes
really flat
so something like that is what it looks
like
right i'm aware i went quite fast
through that last question
um but i did want to leave at least some
time open
uh to questions from the live chat so
i'll give you a minute or two to collect
your thoughts i'm going to clean the
board
and then any questions at all if they're
to do a trig
that's great or if they're doing power
series i'm sure you probably have
questions about some of the stuff i
wrote on the board
but if you have any other math questions
throw them out there as well and i'll
pick some to answer
for the next 10 or so minutes
and also remember because i went through
that quite quick remember you can always
come back
and watch this uh whole video
again tomorrow so youtube takes a while
to process it
but i think it will definitely be
available tomorrow like lunchtime
within 24 hours so if you want to come
back you can rewatch everything we just
did
right uh and maybe pause it and make
sure you're able to follow what we did
um but i will give a summary i see if
somebody has asked for a summary so
let's do that
right then so what did we do we started
um i think the key bits were the power
series weren't they
so key things to remember then um were
we started by me telling you euler's
identity
right so we had euler's identity cos
sine oops sine is it
cos of x plus i
sine of x so we started
by assuming this then
we said um using this formula
we could calculate e to the minus i x
using
the fact that cos was even sine was odd
we could calculate that this
was cos of x minus i
sine of x and then those two results
together
allowed us to deduce that cos of x
was given by e to the i x
plus e to the minus i x over two
and sine x was equal to
minus i x my oops e to the plus
x minus e to the minus ix
over to i so
we started with euler this came from odd
and even functions
these came from algebra adding the two
and then subtracting the two
then we said well i know that the
e to the x has a power series
from naught to infinity of x to the n
over n factorial and if i were to write
out the first few terms you get 1
plus x plus
x squared over 2 plus
x cubed over 3 factorial
right that's your exponential function
so using this definition
we can plug this in for sine
and it turns out that sine of x is equal
to
the odd powers only
and cos of x which i didn't do but you
could calculate in the same way
use our formula plug in ix
into the exponential formula cos of x
is all the even powers um
yeah so 1 minus x squared over 2
plus the 4 for
factorial so you also get your cos
power series again alternating signs
plus minus plus minus plus minus um and
then
having these power series definitions
for cause and sign
so this definition and this one these
are now really helpful when you need to
calculate limits
so the final step was to just divide
this whole thing by
x and then we could actually just plug
in x equals naught
and we got our final answer of one for
that limit
so that's a nice neat summary of the
power series
uh for cos and sign so it came from
euler's identity here
remember this this is euler
and it came from the exponential
function
our two key things those two key things
allowed us to do everything else
with cause and sign
right
um what else have you got for me people
um let's have a read there are quite a
few questions here okay
um
uh i think the question so that was a
very good question um
about uh radians and degrees
uh we use radians because uh degrees
have like they don't really have an arb
it's like an arbitrary unit that you
just don't want to have to deal with
so converting it to radians allows you
to think of things in terms of circles
um and they don't have units so it's
much easier like you saw when i was
trying to draw my graph
i i didn't feel right to say sine of 90
was one while sine of 90 degrees is one
the actual value in radians is sine of
pi over two
is equal to one so when you try to do
something like x
times sine of 90 degrees x like
x being 90 degrees makes no sense but x
being pi over 2
makes complete sense so it's kind of
yeah it just it's just a better notation
i think and allows you to actually think
about functions rather than just
signing calls in terms of triangles um
all right what else have we got
um
i've got some love from mexico thank you
rodrigo
um okay i have two points a and b on a
plane
at a distance between the one meter and
drove them to a point c when the angle
formed is
how to find all right i guess we'll do
that question mr khan let's have a go
i have to draw a diagram and write it
out so
get rid of my summary
this looks like a uh almost like a
straight line graphs combined with
trigonometry question so could indeed be
a good one let's see
oh i should also add everything i just
went through is so far
beyond high school maths it's ridiculous
so there are many people watching
uh who got lost like honestly don't
worry this is like
this is definitely like early university
level stuff for sure
i'm talking about infinite power series
and uh different things
but you know i think it's quite fun to
challenge ourselves
right so musk on your question is i've
got two points a and b
and the distance between them is one
meter right
uh a to b on meter okay
um joining them to this sounds like a
homework question by the way this is if
this is your homework this is a very
cheeky
very very cheeky request but i've
started now um
joining into a point c uh when the
angles formed at point a
are 60 degrees right so
this is 60 degrees okay
and the angle formed at b is 75 degrees
ah so it's a triangle fabulous this is
very relevant to trigonometry
and this is 75 degrees okay and that's
we don't need units so we just call that
one instead of just one meter right and
you want to know
the distance from the middle of a and b
to c
so you want to know the middle of a and
b
to c ah so it's not necessarily
a right angled triangle then is it
that's a bad picture
okay well i think i get the idea
okay my mine looks like a right angle
triangle it's not necessarily going to
be a right angle triangle is it
um right then let's think about this
and you want to know so rather than that
being one this is actually a half and a
half
but i don't know the angle in the middle
so this is my interpretation of the
question if i've interpreted your
question wrong mascara and i apologize
we're going to solve this one
uh right so i've got abc
oops let's do capitals
normally for points and i've got half
and i've got 60 degrees right and i want
to know that
then there but i don't necessarily know
maybe we're going to use the sine rule
you know maybe we're going to go back to
question
one and use the sine rule so i've got
so if i draw this triangle let's call
this number one if i draw a triangle one
what have i got i've got some unknown
length here then i've got a 60 degree
angle
and then i'll try and draw it so it's
not obviously a
so the point is this is not necessarily
a right angle we don't know that
so that's a half this is a and this is
60 degrees
and i want to know um
x but it's not a right angle triangle
see if this was a right angle triangle
if this was a right angle
then we just use trigonometry and we're
done really easy but it isn't
unfortunately so it's gonna
make this a bit trickier so what i would
be tempted to do
is let's think about this um
so let's call this angle here y
so now my sine law tells me that sine of
over x is equal to
sine of y over a half
okay so i don't know the angle y um
and i don't know x but i know that the
sine of this angle over this length is
equal to sine of this angle over this
length
now i can do the same on the other side
i think
and get something else so the triangle
on the other side
let's say it looks like this where this
is 75
degrees uh this is a half
this is still x and this is some other
unknown
length let's call it z
and then the angle opposite let's call
that alpha
right so sign law here tells me
sine of 75
um oh wait why have i done that i didn't
need
to know no don't need to know that
ignore me
and ignore that that said
so sine of 75 over x
is equal to sine of z
over a half
right
so where can i go from here so i think
we've got uh two equations
but we've got three unknowns we don't
know x we don't know y and we don't know
zed
so what could we really do here then
we need one more equation involving x y
and z
right so my my approach here is to try
and construct simultaneous equations
uh so whilst we don't actually care
about the values of y and z
the key thing is oh i know what the
third equation is yes
okay i've done it you can see how much i
enjoy solving problems
um right so we don't care about y and z
we only care about x but to construct
true equations
we have to label the other angles y and
z
now the thing that i know
is this is a triangle abc is a triangle
right so i know that 60
plus 75 plus the angle at the top
must equal 180
now the angle at the top based on my
pictures
is y plus z right because y was the one
up here
this is y and this half of it is z
part of it is z so i know that this is
uh so 45 so i know the final equation is
y plus
z is 45 degrees
so i'm not going to do the algebra
because i don't have a calculator
equation one equation
two
equation three
solve those simultaneously it's got
three simultaneous equations
plug the numbers in the calculator first
sine 60 sine 75
solve it and you'll get x and y and z as
well
right perfect good question ms khan
actually
i still think it sounds like your
homework but
fair enough you've now got an answer to
your homework question uh right so i've
actually gone six minutes over i got so
into that
um so thank you again everyone for
joining me um
this is the penultimate one of these
isn't it this is the fifth
so the second to last so next friday 4
p.m
uk time same time as it's always been
will be the final
uh tom rock's maths appeal live stream
uh the topic next week is probability
trees
so basically we can spend an hour
talking about probability
so if you've got any problems to do with
probability if you enjoy probability
you're studying it you don't like it
you're stuck
whatever i'll be doing a live stream in
exactly one week
for an hour on probability so again like
before if you send your questions in
early
then i will definitely go through them
because i always start by going through
uh questions i've been sent before and
then at the end i'll open it up to the
live chat
exactly as i've done the last few weeks
okay so i think that was pretty good
i quite enjoyed that one i hope you all
did and hopefully i'll see you all in a
week
and remember to watch the new mass
appeal video on monday
monday it will be out on probability
right
see you all soon bye